Welcome hello everybody I'm Jessica DiRuzza
from Trust Psyche and it is such a joy to
be able to spend the Sunday together this is
our free monthly try psyche livestream that we
host right here every first Sunday of the month
all are welcome so please invite your friends we
host a variety of speakers on a myriad of topics
and you can find out more about us at recipe.com
and you can sign up for these live streams
at truss psyche comm backslash live stream
to participate live and to ask your questions
if you value what we do here today the best
way you can support us is by subscribing to our
youtube channel liking this video and sharing it
with all of your friends i'm very honored and
excited to present our guest speaker for today
Chris Bache who's going to be presenting on his
forthcoming book LSD and The Mind of the Universe:
Diamonds from Heaven released this November 26.
You can pre-order your copy today through Amazon.
Up until the 1700s humans believed that the
edge of our universe ended at the planet Saturn
the last visible planet that we can see with the
unaided eye with the invention of the telescope we
turned it to the heavens and to our great surprise
we discovered the planet Uranus twice as far out
as the planet Saturn our universe doubled in size
then in the 1800s with the discovery of Neptune
our universe once again doubled in size then in
1931 with the discovery of Pluto our universe then
again doubled in size and now less than 400 years
later from the discovery of Uranus we have the
deep space Hubble telescope which shows us that
there are trillions upon trillions of galaxies
in our universe for me this is analogous to the
work that Chris has done and his deep exploration
of consciousness radically breaking open and
through our cosmology and our philosophy and our
metaphysics through the 73 high dose LSD sessions
that he did it over 20 years and began to share
with us in his work dark night early dawn steps
to a deep ecology of mind now with LSD and the
mind of the universe Chris takes us further into
Diamond luminosity and brings back the diamonds
from heaven that he so graciously shares with
all of us here today there couldn't be a more
important time for Chris to share his work with
all of us both in the greater understanding and
acceptance of psychedelics today but also because
of the psycho spiritual death and rebirth that our
collective human species seems to be going through
right now so please help me give a very warm and
loving welcome to our beloved friend Chris Bosh
and when Chris is done speaking you each have an
opportunity to ask your questions so please
have those ready as that is our favorite and
those special part of these live streams thank you
so much for being with us here today hi everyone
Thank You Jessica and Travis thank you for this
opportunity to share my work with participants
intrapsychic aam it is truly an honor to do so
it's also an overwhelming task because this book
covers so many dimensions of consciousness
it covers so many years of work and when I
talk about it I have a tendency to get absorbed
naturally into the experience as I'm describing
and that makes compressing 20 years of work and
20 years of thinking and writing into a very short
presentation really challenging so to me a talk
is the most effective way to get to question and
answers so I'll try to keep this contained and
as brief as I can and then save a good half hour
at the end for Q&A and we'll see where that goes
maybe even more than a half an hour so I'm going
to start with a little bit of background first
of all those are you who know me and some of you
don't know me the last person you would expect to
have written a book on psychedelics I was raised
in the deep south in Mississippi I was raised
in a middle-class Catholic background I wanted
to be a salmon priest early in my life was in the
seminary for three years in high school I studied
theology at Notre Dame New Testament criticism at
Cambridge and then philosophy of religion at Brown
by the time I had finished graduate school I was
a atheistic Lee inclined agnostic and the 60s had
completely passed me by I was not psychedelically
involved in in my college or graduate school at
all so I was naive psychedelically and I was an
atheistic Lee inclined agnostic philosophically
and then came Ellis team shortly after beginning
my career I met the work of Stan Grof and that set
my life on the course that I'm still harvesting
today so first let me start a PowerPoint that
I'll be using and then I'm gonna keep this on
only for about 10 minutes and then I'll shift
in and out of it again later let me see if I can
get this started here this is what the book will
look like and I'll tell you a secret about this
book this is the publishers title LSD in the
mind of the universe my title is diamonds from
heaven because diamonds from heaven is a story
of a journey what they wanted a more marketable
title and that's LSD in the mind of the universe
the beginning of this book goes back 40 years
over 40 years when I had begun graduate school
in 78 right then I met the work of stanislav
grof his book realms of the human unconscious
turned my life around followed quickly by LSD
psychotherapy he gave me the method and the
confidence to pursue the method of exploring my
consciousness and through that exploration to
come to know the deep psyche the deep universe
better I want to emphasize that I did this work
as a philosopher I was not a therapist I was not
primarily seeking healing though healing did come
but I was seeking to understand our universe as
deeply as I could by exploring my consciousness
as deeply as I could so a few observations
on method and then we'll kind of go right
into the content everyone is aware I think of the
distinction between low-dose psycholytic therapy
that stand develops and high-dose psychedelic
therapy low dose psychedelic therapy peels the
mind gradually layer by layer in very intense
therapeutic encounters psychedelic therapy is
a very different protocol it's a protocol trying
to trick her in the early days who are trying to
trigger a near-death experience for people who
had terminal cancer they were trying to heal
them but to trigger an encounter with the universe
that would open them to the world that they were
about to enter when I began my own work I chose
to work with high doses of LSD primarily because
it was simply difficult to get time to arrange
a day of inter journeying with the dual-career
marriage and I wanted to make the most out of
every day that I could put into this I thought
of myself as basically doing an extended regimen
of psychedelic therapy doing just psychedelic
therapy but for a longer period of time originally
psychedelic therapy was limited to a maximum of
three sessions and I thought well you could
do three sessions with this work safely you
could do it more sessions and do it safely when
I got to the end of this journey and was looking
back over sláinte I began to appreciate that what
happened in my work was different than what I saw
being recorded reported in psychedelic therapy so
different that I thought it needed a new kind of
language to describe it so I've chosen the term
psychedelic exploration psychedelic exploration
is the method of psychedelic therapy isolation
earphones had headphones music total protection
with the sitter the difference is the number of
sessions involved in my case 73 high-dose sessions
between 1979 and 1999 I worked for four years I
stopped for six years for reasons that I described
in the book and then I resumed for a very intense
10-year process I did this work between when I
was thirty and fifty years old I'm now 70 years
old so I've taken a long time to present this
work completely candidly to the world partly
for legal reasons and partly because it simply
takes a long time it took me a long time to map
and understand all the dynamics of the sessions
that unfolded during these years I want to say
at the outset that this is not a methodology that
I would recommend today if I were doing it over
again I would be gentler on myself I would take
a slower process of engaging the great expanse of
the mind of the universe I would balance high-dose
work with low dose sessions I would also balance
working with LSD with working with psilocybin and
ayahuasca more body grounded psychedelics for
a variety of reasons all of which I discuss in
the book don't have time to go into here I tried
to do this work as systematically and rigorously
as I can working as a philosopher I made it a high
priority to make a complete and phenomenologically
accurate record of my sessions within 24 hours and
then studied the sessions and the dynamics arcing
across sessions and comparing my experiences
to those who were that had been had by other
psychedelic journey errs this is a snapshot of
my journal about 400 pages my psychedelic notes
that for me are my personal Bible they are the
record of my deepest experiences of the universe
and therefore in my life they come before all
other discursive thinking and analytic analysis
kept detailed records of my sessions all the way
through I looked at and studied the astrological
transits of my sessions trying I was aware of
Rick and Stan's thinking about the relationship
between the outer transits the outer planets and
the global transits and how they affect one's work
in deep non-ordinary states so I wanted to study
this hypothesis myself and look at how my sessions
projected against the rhythms of the solar system
during the years I was doing this work I want to
emphasize that the story I'm telling in LSD
in the mind of the universe is not primarily
a personal story I mean it is a personal story at
one level but in another sense it's not primarily
a personal story this series of curves represents
a series of LSD sessions and I found that after
the first 15 sessions or so when I was working
insights and help in my personal life tended to
come at the beginning and end of my sessions as
I was leaving and returning to time-space reality
that's reflected in these small circles when the
session was in its peak hours represented by the
large circles I was usually operating beyond curse
my personal reality beyond Chris Bhatia's reality
not entirely but largely and so the story I'm
telling in LSD in the mind of the universe is
the story of what unfolded in those large circles
at the peak hours of my psychedelic sessions this
is primarily a cosmological narrative it's
not primarily a therapeutic narrative the
details the personal details are important in a
therapeutic not work narrative it's not so much in
a cosmological narrative I found when I did this
work that what unfolded in my work was a series
a multiple series of experiences of death and
rebirth that eventually kind of concretize dinh
to this picture the drop below the line that line
is kind of represents the border of time-space
the drop below the line is egoic reality our
individual space time consciousness and the
first death and rebirth which is the one most
frequently talked about in the literature is ego
death which takes place in that first level when
we make the transition from ordinary consciousness
into early trance personal consciousness but if
you continue to work and press the limits of your
experience I found that there are other deaths
which take place at other levels of consciousness
and wife I look Stan Grof in using the vocabulary
of psychic subtle and causal reality to describe
some of these deeper levels of consciousness
I don't have a vested interest in how many
levels of reality there might be or how many
times the circle of death and rebirth may turn
what's important is the principle that if
s one pushes deeper and deeper and deeper
if you do this work systematically
there are a series of deaths and
rebirths that open in the process
as I have looked back and mapped
these circles oversimplify of course these
are a number of sessions and what is shown
here is the sort of circles within circles the
deaths within deaths that mark a deepening of
progressive deepening into causal level reality so
yeah circles within circles when I looked over the
entirety of all of my psychedelic work identified
five fundamental death rebirth processes or levels
of consciousness where death and rebirth were
operating these are the five levels first the
death of self by which I mean the death of our
time-space identity as our individual identity
as our sense of who and what we are moving into
collective mind there are three chapters in the
book dealing with the dynamics of collective mind
the ocean of suffering deep time then archetype
Lamine experiences that the high archetypal
level experienced it the Lord archetypal level
followed by immersion in causal oneness oneness
services of course much earlier in the sequence
but there is something quite distinctive about
causal level oneness and finally the diamond
luminosity work after everything that had taken
place before emerging into the diamond light that
Buddhism calls dharmakaya I call the diamond
luminosity so let me before turning off the
power point let me simply take you through
a list of the chapters of LSD in the mind
of the universe there is a methodology chapter
chapter one but then in terms of the content of
the experiences crossing the boundary of birth and
death the ocean of suffering deep time in the soul
initiation into the universe the greater real of
archetypal reality a benediction of blessings the
birth of the future human diamond and Manasa
tea and final vision and then there is the
last chapter coming off the mountain it took me
actually a year just to write that last chapter
that is a chapter in which I reflect on what has
been happening in my life in the 20 years after
I stopped my psychedelic work what I'll do is go
through each of these chapters and simply mention
a few points on each of the chapters work through
the list as quickly as I can and then we'll open
it up for questions and answers let me keep track
of my time okay first crossing the boundary of
life and death is the one that's easiest because
it's most familiar it's so thoroughly described
in stan grof literature when I entered this domain
which took about two and a half years to navigate
and ten sessions my work began Sacher became
saturated with confrontations with death fetal
sensations all sorts of severe perinatal seizures
a purging of the body eventually culminating in
ego death my ego death basically involved a
complete reversal of everything that I knew
myself to be at the time I was an academic a
white male academic philosopher passionately
concerned with the meaning of life I became
the complete opposite of that I became women
women of color women who were not interested in
philosophical reflection at all I became it was
a frightening experience a terrifying experience
but when I let go when I let go and allowed myself
to become all these women who were so different
from me I entered the world of women and was given
the experience of hundreds and hundreds of women
under the arm with a great mother it was a truly
life-changing experience for me and I wish every
man could have that experience when I went into
when I went through that death and rebirth process
and went into continued to work I entered into a
domain of suffering and pain and agony collective
pain and suffering that was so severe I came to
call it the ocean of suffering so let me back up
just for a second working at these levels as I
did it every session basically had two phases a
first phase which was a purification phase and a
second phase which was the ecstatic phase the
purification phase would be some type of very
profound cathartic purification engagement
and if that was allowed to continue to its
culmination there was some type of a breakthrough
and then the recession's pivoted to an ecstatic
portion for the remainder of the session when I'm
describing the ocean of suffering I'm describing
the purification phase of the next two years of
work tremendous suffering at first I thought this
was a deepening of ego death I thought somehow
that pieces of my ego were still in play and that
this collective suffering represented a deepening
of ego death but eventually this continued for
so long and it was so severe that I came to a
different conclusion the conclusion I came to
is that somewhere along the line something had
happened in my sessions that these ordeals were
not really aimed at my personal transformation
at all that somewhere along the line the focus
of my work at this point became actually the
purification and healing of some aspect of the
collective psyche some aspect of the collective
unconscious but somehow I was tapping into pain
and suffering which was lodged in the collective
psyche and by engaging this pain and suffering
consciously it was in some way being lifted out of
the collective psyche and therefore lightening the
kind of karmic burden that our species was holding
well I wrote dark night early dawn primarily to
understand this whole dynamic primarily to
understand how my sessions how death could
become as large as it became in my sessions and by
integrating Rupert Sheldrake's concept of morphic
fields into Stan Grof paradigm the way open to
viewing these experiences as part of a larger
transformational practice aimed at the collective
psyche in the ecstatic portion of these next these
two years of sessions in the ecstatic portion I
entered into what I call deep time in the soul
I and I began to have experiences of my life as
a completed whole from start to finish with all
the time moments of my life with all the themes
and all the people in circumstances of my life
simultaneously present and I was basically taken
into this territory consistently for one year over
and over again seven sessions went deeper deeper
and was basically given a profound crash course
and Chris beiges life what it was about who the
people were that I was involved in my life was
taken into a kind of a spiritual distillation of
what my life was about and what it was going to
be about when I first entered this reality and
came out of it after the session it had been the
most powerful and transformative experience of
my life and yet I couldn't remember it after the
session was over I could not hold on to trance
terrible experiences of this magnitude because
there simply was no reference point in my ordinary
consciousness to anchor them but when I went back
again and again and again I found that I was able
to hold on to these experiences more effectively I
was able to remember them I was able to bring more
and more of them back and this is an important
point if you want to enter into these states and
you cultivate systemic recall of the experiences
in these states you have to really work with
a lot of discipline you have to engage them
very conscientiously record them conscientiously
and if you hold this position well you literally
learn how to become how to be stay conscious in
states of consciousness that previously you were
not able to hold the conscious awareness in and
this pattern repeated every time I would break
through to a new level there was always a period
of disorientation a period of loss of memory but
then when I would keep going back over and over
and over again to that new level my cognition
improved my perception improved my ability to
understand and record all the experiences improved
now the ocean of suffering work I said lasted
two years and 14 sessions but this was actually
divided into one year of work and then I took my
six year break and then I started my second Delic
work again when I started after my six year break
the ocean of suffering began exactly where it had
been in the first year of work so six years
later completely different circumstances in
my life completely different expectations and
different astrological conditions nevertheless
my sessions began exactly where they had stopped
which is an indication of the the intentionality
of the intelligence that's guiding our work when I
started this after the break the ecstatic portion
of the sessions began at a completely different
place the ecstatic portion of the sessions began
in what I came to call initiation into the
universe I was taken systematically by some
intelligence that never adopted any form but I
always felt an intelligence that seemed to be
intent on teaching me how the universe functions
how it operates I was given a crash course in
cosmology 101 in this material the initiation
of the universe I should mention I give names
to my sessions I give every session a name the
name reflects the pith content of the session
and I break the session down in bullet points the
names of the sessions that I gave this chapter on
initiation the universe these are the sessions
that are discussed in that chapter you and I
creating was really a crash course in cosmology
the cosmic tour was an extraordinary tour of the
universe then there was a training session
and I called the Council of Elders a session
which was training me and how to maintain coherent
consciousness as these deeper levels of awareness
were opening dying into one was an extraordinary
immersion into oneness the master plan was the
beginning of a series of visions that I'm going to
come back to later it was a series of initiations
into what appeared to be the plan that the
creative intelligence had for the evolution
of the human species at this point in its history
I know it sounds monstrously arrogant to talk like
that but this is simply what happened in the
sessions and then healing the collective wound
healing the collective wound was the ocean of
suffering came into a culmination it came into
an extraordinary hard to describe I lay it out
of the book as best as I can hard to describe
the magnitudes of suffering that one can enter
into in this work and when that work came to its
crescendo I was spun from there into archetypal
reality and the ocean of suffering never returned
in future sessions there was a lot of work there
was suffering but it was never this collective
suffering that seemed to reflect the history of
the human species after the initiation of the
universe I entered archetypal reality this lasted
about one and a half years and eleven sessions
when I entered archetypal reality I entered a
reality that immediately was recognized as more
real than physical reality every time I entered
this level of work I I had the sensation that I
was entering a reality that was more real more
existentially real than time and space in fact
it became very disorienting to realize how deluded
and watered-down reality is inside time and space
reality when I entered this work my human identity
began to fall away from me I found that we have a
sense of being human that is deeper than our
sense of being any individual human an ego
is a death of our individual experience of being
human but entering archetypal reality required
that I somehow let go of human experience at a
deeper level and eventually I could no longer
fit myself back into any cognitive frame of
reference related to Homo sapiens I entered
a level of consciousness that I experiences being
above and beyond human consciousness and there I
was systematically worked with and given lessons
on how reality operated there these experiences
kind of broke down and at two different levels at
the high platonic level at the highest level level
I encountered beings that were completely beyond
my ability to conceptualize and understand my mind
imaged them like galaxies there were just vast
beings that were the creators of time and space
they were the creators of life on this planet
they were the guardians of existence they were the
massive constitutional forces that actually create
everything that we know as times space in this
magnificent universe at a lower archetypal level
at more of a Jungian level I was taken and given
many experiences of the collective consciousness
our collective psyche our collective unconscious
and even kind of a collective body that all
of our bodies are cells in I was given many
experiences on how the collective psyche works
on how reality functions at this level these all
took place primarily at subtle level reality so I
was given exercises and the nuts and bolts of how
reality works how our individual Minds ourselves
within a larger mind and even how our individual
bodies our cells within some kind of fundamental
core archetype of the human body and that when we
engage and heal diseases in our individual body
we simultaneously are impacting the health of
the human families larger body the list of the
sessions that I address in this chapter xxviii
session was an extraordinarily positive session
ecstatic session in which I broke through and
touched calls a level reality for the first time
and extremely clear lucid hard to describe state
of hyper clarity and then I was quite surprised
to go through three sessions of just gut-wrenching
cleansing just on our deal of physical
psychological cleansing that had absolutely
no cognitive content associated with it at all
it's just a just a gut-wrenching cleansing in time
to make a very long story short I began to realize
that what there is a cycle that I came to call the
cycle of purification the cycle of purification
is that every step into a deeper level of
consciousness is a step into a higher level of
energy so that when we when I first broke into
causal level reality in the 28th session I touched
a reality that was so pure that it triggered a
purification process in my being that lasted
three sessions extending over six months and
I found that this pattern repeated itself over and
over again as I continued to go deeper every time
I broke into a new level of conscious and had that
ecstatic experience of waking up in a deeper level
of reality the following sessions were very very
difficult very much involved in cleansing carrying
out the garbage so much so that I began to dread
the sessions that immediately followed the major
breakthrough sessions I should mention here that
one of the things that opened up this level is I
began to experience reincarnation as a collective
previously and those of you who know my book on
reincarnation life cycles know that the story of
the soul of the story I'm telling of reincarnation
there is the story of our individual evolution
directing our individual evolution over many
lifetimes reflecting our individual choices and
our individual learning but now I began to have
experiences of the entire planet entering into a
reincarnation process and I experienced millions
of people over time century after century millions
of people incarnated in a way that was integrated
that was you not uniform but that was integrated
so that all of our individual karma our individual
soul aspirations our individual challenges were
all part of the collective karma collective
challenges and our collective development as a
species it was magnificently beautiful to witness
this interplay between individual and collective
reincarnation again all of these taking place at
the subtle level of reality when one was gauging
the deeper architecture of the universe after
spending about 11 months exploring archetypal
reality and at going through this 11 sessions
going through this very quickly I entered what I
came to call the benediction of blessings it was
a period of extraordinary blessings just given
one massive blessing after another these are the
names of the four sessions that I address in this
chapter the forest was an experience of Shunyata
emptiness of self no self in me no self anywhere
around me an experience of radical and profound
transparency the birth of the diamond soul I
mentioned in a second singing the universal way
was an experience of primal void experience
had culminated in the experience of such at
ananda consciousness being in bliss eventually
moving into a complete void the fertile void
that subsumes and is the origin out of which the
physical university merged Jesus blood was an
experience of extraordinary cosmic love love like
I have never known it before just super saturated
soul saturated engaging of love the birth of
diamond soul I want to mention because it'll
come up later in the work in that experience in
the birth of the diamond soul session which was
really a deeply moving long-lasting session
for me I began to experience all of my former
lives coming into me very fast very quickly eleven
years before I had experienced my entire life from
beginning to end now I began to experience all my
lives coming in and it was like the we're wrapping
kite string around a spool and at some point this
spool ignited It was as if we hit critical mass
and all of these lives fused into a singularity
and when they fuse an extraordinary light broke
out of my chest it was my first contact with what
I later called Diamond light and I think what I
was being given in this session was an experience
of how reincarnation works and where reincarnation
is taking humanity this process of accumulating
more and more experience more and more lives is
not simply improving us and making us better
beings one life at a time adding a little bit
here a little bit there but eventually we're
collecting experience and I think eventually in
the entire human saga all of us are coming into a
stage where eventually all of our knowledge all of
our experience everything we've ever done everyone
we've ever known through these lives there is a
fusion of that knowledge and when that knowledge
fuses we are catapulted into a higher operational
status with a different relationship to the
universe a greater transparency to the universe
and also a different relationship with everyone
around us because we have been connected to each
other for so many lifetimes we have been fathers
mothers enemies friends partners in so many
lifetimes when we become whole within ourselves
it opens up a depth of compassion to all beings
we experience around us and not just human beings
all beings on our planet after the benediction of
blessings where the work went next was into
the diamond luminosity work I was completely
existentially satisfied after the the benediction
of blessings work I had given something that I had
been asked to give in the ocean of suffering and
I had been repaid and given more in return that I
could possibly have imagined but then we went
into the diamond luminosity work but before I
begin to tell you about that I want to back step a
little bit and talk about the birth of the future
human because it's been a reoccurring theme in
my session starting all the way back to the 22nd
session all the way through to the end of the
sessions a reoccurring theme is what is happening
to the human race where are we in our evolutionary
journey now I tell this story in the book I've
brought together in one place all of the session
material related to the birth of the future human
in this one chapter so in the starting with
experiences that first appeared in chapter 6
the initiation of the universe running all the way
through I gathered them all together and collected
them into two segments first is a segment that I
call the visions of awakening which are visions
that I have been given in different piecemeal
fashion about where we are and where we are going
I break this down into six visions these are the
six themes of our wakening what was most striking
to me about this was first how dramatic this
process was and how the experience was that we
were poised to move into an evolutionary to make
an evolutionary jump that would completely propel
us into a higher order of functioning not only as
individuals but as a species we are poised on the
edge of a profound Great Awakening but in all of
these visions and I'm going so fast I hate to go
so fast through them but in all of these visions
I and which kept pointing to an awakening taking
place on the planet of the human species of the
entire species the consciousness of our universe
was actually trying to awaken the entire human
species I was not shown how this was going to take
place I was not shown how this was even possible
and then about a year and a half after the last
of the visions of awakening I was given a session
right in the middle of the diamond luminosity work
I had entered the diamond luminosity in sessions
45 and 50 I would enter it again later in sessions
60 and 66 right in the middle I was taken into the
deep time of our species I was given an experience
of tape being taken right into the center of the
Great Awakening that we are coming into and there
I experienced this transformation not as an
individual human being my boundaries had been
opened so many times in the years preceding that
I experienced the Great Awakening as our species
I was taken inside the collective psyche and was
given an experience of what will be happening from
the perspective of the collective unconscious
my experience there was that for there to be
a Great Awakening of this magnitude there must
first take place a great death a great surrender
we must be purged and emptied of all our old
ways of thinking and feeling before the space
is created to allow awakening of a higher order
of knowing so that the time of great awakening
was preceded by a time of great breakdown loss of
control literally an unraveling of life as we know
it just as in a psychedelic session one must let
go of everything and experience a profound death
before great visions open likewise for our species
we must let go of everything that has dominated
our past all the constrictions of our thinking the
constrictions of our mind and the constrictions
of our heart in order to open to this new future
which is coming there is a third segment on the
birth of the future human and that came later in
the chapter on the final vision I want to say that
my visions didn't tell me how this was going to
take place they didn't tell me when it was going
to take place and didn't give me any information
about the details it took me inside the collective
psyche and gave me an experience of the collective
psyches experience of this and it also gave me
an understanding and experience of some of the
mechanisms that are involved at the collective
level that will help us move make this huge
transition we are trying to make in the little
time that we have to make it I discussed this
I present this I discussed it in darknet early
dawn and I lay it out again in LSD in the mind
of the universe the diamond luminosity material
as I said before after the benediction of
blessings I had no idea where the work was
going to go I was completely existentially
satisfied I had thought I had been drawn deep
into the cosmic process I had been overwhelmed
with cosmic love I had been taken into the fertile
void underneath all physical existence I had no
idea where things would go but there were still
five years ahead on the journey and the diamond
luminosity kevlars four years of the work and
26 sessions it's by far covers more sessions than
any other chapter in the book and a longer period
of time what happened was after going through yet
one more very intense death and rebirth process I
was taken into a reality a level of consciousness
that was well Buddhism calls it dharmakaya the
clear light of absolute love absolute reality
I was taken in a domain of consciousness that
was absolute pure light the most striking thing
about the experience was how clear clear clear
beyond imagination this domain was just to touch
this for a few minutes was life transforming in
and of itself absolutely clear clear beyond the
species mind beyond archetypal reality beyond
physical any derivative of physical consciousness
into this hyper clear celestial state over the
next four years I entered this reality four
times and only four times out of 26 sessions
only four of them took me deep into this reality
here are the names of the sessions death state
diamond luminosity the universal field of light
in the nature of mind in between these sessions
as you might imagine there were many sessions of
continuing intense purification because this was
a deeper level of reality of much more pure level
of reality and that required the purification of
my physical and psychological system in order
to stabilize consciousness at this reality they
also scattered in these sessions it was a great
deal of personal healing that took place which is
kind of curious to me because I would have thought
that personal healing would have taken place much
earlier in the journey but it took place here and
I discussed I came to understand why things were
unfolding in that order the first two of these
sessions were taking me deeper and deeper into
Diamond luminosity which really piqued them in
the 50th session the second two session 60 and
66 the diamond luminosity was crunching itself
deeper and deeper into my physical system into
my psychological system into my physical body as
I said talking about these sessions they're very
powerful they draw me into them just to try
to describe that the time is short so I want
to move through and we'll keep going and we can
come back to mend the question-and-answers let
me mention one thing midway through this process
and the 50th session when I went into the deepest
transcendent experience I ever had in any of
the sessions into the deepest level of diamond
luminosity I was as far into the crystalline
body of God as I had ever been and would ever
be and right in the middle of this session I
had an experience that completely changed my
understanding of existence in the middle of this
session my visual field pivoted 90 degrees and I
saw reality that was far beyond the reality that
I was in inside diamond luminosity and a ray of
light came out of that distant reality and hit
me and it completely shattered it just I just
absolutely shattered me and in that experience
I realized that there is no end to this journey
there is no destiny point at end point that one
eventually reaches that the divine is infinite
and will never ever I will never ever be able
to reach even using this powerful method to
the absolute ends of that reality now this is
important because I had absorbed and many of
us have absorbed the idea that there is an end
point to this journey you become one with God
where you enter into the meta cosmic void that
there's an end point and you keep pushing until
you reach that end point and I had experienced
oneness with God but I discovered that there are
many permutations of oneness there are levels
and levels of oneness and I had experienced the
the formless void but I had learned that there
are actually dimensions of formlessness there
are depths of born lessness when I when the
diamond luminosity were opened I thought it
came with such a profound sense of homecoming it
was so deeply satisfying I thought I had finally
found my destination I finally found my stopping
point I had found the end of the journey in this
session session fifty showed me that there are
dimensions beyond even that and I would never
ever reach some final standpoint the reason the
death kept returning over and over again in this
work is if you keep driving yourself and you have
a method that submission would powerful to keep
taking you Pastor then limits the universe will
keep taking you deeper and deeper and deeper into
yourself into itself and will never be able to
reach the very end of it and that's why I would
be gentler with myself if I were doing this
work over again because now I understand that
the goal was not to get to some end state or some
ultimate dimension the goal is to open ourselves
to the trends ascendant realities and let us
much of that spiritual reality into our hearts
and into our minds to let it change us down to the
heart and soul and incorporate as much of it as we
possibly can and bring as much of divinity into
time and space as we possibly can and be patient
with the rest I'm a little more patient now than
I was when I was a young man doing this work
and then this brings me to the final addition
chapter the chapter where yeah I'm gonna take
a shortcut here I'll simply say that I was put
through a horrendously powerful stripped-down
process and was taken deeper into deep time than
I had ever been taken before and I was given an
extraordinarily powerful series of visions about
human evolution and was allowed to experience
again the future human that we are in the process
of becoming to experience the architecture the
inner architecture of the deep psyche of the
future human and this is a magnificent being
just to just to think about this being just to
remember the magnitude of this being brings tears
to my eyes it's so important for us to hold on to
the vision of what we are where we are going and
what is happening in the deep structure of history
because it's the shadows of our travail deep and
as we enter the great time of unraveling as we
enter the purification that we are coming into
now it's going to be very tempting and there'll
be all sorts of voices talking about Armageddon
and apocalypse and the extinction and the end of
times and this is not the end of anything this
is the process of giving birth to a new and finer
version of humanity after this the akancha sness
guiding my sessions wrapped it up I didn't know
we were stopping but it wrapped it up and took me
through two experiences which I called the goodbye
shion's it basically wrapped up all of our work
and at the end of the 73rd session I knew that it
was time for me to stop I want to talk about very
briefly coming off the mountain overall I think I
did a good job integrating my sessions as I went
I paid a lot of attention to my body I took good
care of my body I did a lot of spiritual practice
I wrote my sessions down carefully I tried to
internalize them as deeply as I could session
by session I think I did a good job of integrating
my sessions and because I had been given so many
gifts and so many blessings in the course of my 20
years of work I thought that I could simply stop
my sessions and step back and I would continue
to be nourished by those experiences and I was
and that did happen but that's not all that's
happened in the years following the ending of
my work in 1999 I found myself gradually entering
into a period of what I call the deep sadness a
profound existential sadness what I was suffering
from was a loss of communion with the divine I
had entered so deeply into the divine so deeply
into the luminous reality of such supreme super
cosmic reality that I knew I would never enter
that deeply into reality into the divinity again
before I died I knew I was going away I was
setting it aside and coming back in it for a
variety of reasons to much to go into here I had
to stop my sessions it was important for me to
stop them but I knew I would never experience
the divine this deeply again until I died and
I would experience it again well when I died
but not being able to return this deeply into
divinity became an open heartache for me once
you have been have known the joy of dissolving
into the divine light once you have dissolved
completely into the boundary list condition
transcending time and space life on earth can
tend to feel kind of dried up and basically I
was losing interest in continuing to live inside
time and space eventually I realized I was just
waiting to die I was taking care of my children
I was taking care of my students and teaching
writing but in my heart of hearts I was waiting
to die so that I could return to my beloved to the
divine and then years passed and I realized this
is not right this is not the way it's supposed
to be everything about my life was screaming
failure to integrate but because I had tried
to integrate each of my sessions so carefully
and so conscientiously I did not understand work
the failure could lie but I had no choice but to
recognize that somewhere along the line something
had gone wrong that it would leave me feeling
so existentially adrift in its wake so I turned
and studied my work further to try to figure
out what had gone wrong and what I learned was
integrating an entire journey is different than
integrating individual sessions then basically
hard to talk about in a matter
of seconds and a half a minute
it's hard to describe the process of in a sense
having too much god it almost sounds like a
contradiction in terms early more of God is always
better now this entire physical universe is the
body of God I knew that I know that I'm standing
here and surrounded and part of the body of the
divinity but even that knowledge which had been
given me in my sessions did not save me from the
consequences but having entered into full divine
presence so many times in time I began to realize
that I had lost a balance in my sessions and the
balance was between transcendence and imminence
I had entered so deeply into transcendent reality
that I had lost my foothold in space-time reality
transcendence is a magnificent thing it's
very healing to experience transcendence
it's very it's very sane making it's very
teaches us what and why we're here but too
much transcendence can be disorienting too much
transcendence can actually make you lose contact
with another great truth and that is the truth
of our embodied existence I made a completely
strong commitment to reestablishing my presence
inside time and space it took me about 10 years
I did it through conscious exercises and I did
it through a sheer commitment to live as I was
where I was for the my remaining years in this
earth and it took me about about 10 years to
really get solidly grounded and operational on
the earth I will say at the same time that I've
learned to manage my memories of transcendence
my memories of communion but they're always
there in the back of my mind they always guide
me in the in the larger trajectory of my life
yes hello thank you very much for sharing this
amazing appearance today you have a I made from
Israel I wanted to ask two questions first of all
the about when you say a high dose what is what
is the what are the doses that we were talking
about yeah yeah okay go ahead and the second
question I wanted to ask about all this all the
setting you know what was the setting cause you
know III consumed I do a lot work with with with
plants and I was very interesting to know about
the setting how was the setting of the of the of
it of the of the journeys how you did it how you
prepared yourself how you did what was in the
moment if you were sitting if you're lying you
iced clothes music music nature although these
things and they I would like to know about this
and about also about how you were in the daily
life what kind of things helped you to to stay
here in a good way like what spiritual practices
or exercise of food or something that was thank
you very much yeah good questions thank you I'm
worked at 500 to 600 micrograms which is very
high doses of LSD and I mean low dose psychedelic
work maybe one two hundred micrograms this was
very high levels my setting I was always working
in complete privacy and inside I was either in my
own house or at my wife's professional office well
I was always lying down I was basically if you if
you look at Stan's book LSD psychotherapy you'll
get the protocol laid out in great detail music
was very carefully curated to pace the stages
of the opening and closing of the session always
wearing eye shades not really and the only way of
my sitter would be in communication with me was
primarily through the music she took care of my
body and took care of the music and so I was not
in nature mm-hmm what was the other part of your
oath the grounding practices um really important
you have to maintain grounding is a dynamic
balance my life was very kind of grounded in
a schedule in reality first of all was grounded
in relationships was grounded in a long marriage
my first wife 24-year marriage it was grounded
in my roles and responsibilities as a father I
have three children so wherever I was on Monday
I was on Saturday I was back in the classroom
on Monday and I was taking care of my children on
Sunday morning in my teaching a head of a rhythmic
a constant set of responsibilities that kept me
always on track always kind of I always grounded
in my responsibilities of teaching my students I
was always doing spiritual practice I was always
doing a form of meditation I encorte did different
types of meditation over the years but I was
always meditating took care of my body doing yoga
various physical practices it's really important
to stay in lively contact with one's physical
world while doing this work so basically we're
just blowing consciousness out to its farthest
limits and then it spontaneously Rican jails and
I found that myself I had a seemingly a natural
capacity an easy capacity Jessica I can no doubt
explain in my chart the markers of that yeah a
capacity to let loose and let go of boundaries and
then to Rican Geel back into my time-space reality
yeah does that cover your questions enough yes yes
thank you very much so I just left question is
to consume this you always made sure let's say
there will be someone like in a distance on the
house or somewhere that it would need you need
assistance or yeah like you always you make sure
that they nobody would be there yes in my is my
mic on yes okay yes I was never left alone I was
always taking care of my wife was my sitter she's
a clinical psychologist my first wife Carol she
was my sitter how she never left me alone and she
she had complete responsibility for taking care
of our world we were always isolated we were in
private there were no interruptions to my work
when I basically closed the door and we entered
this world there was absolutely nothing that was
going to intrude from the outside world I think
that's really important it's important to have an
absolute clear container I call it entering the
Kiva just as in in the southwestern United States
when they would do spiritual practice they crawl
into the Kiva a hole in the ground they pull up
the ladder and you're isolated completely from
the world while you're doing this work if you're
going to go deep into the universes and very very
important to have a completely grounded isolated
protected environment so that you know that
whatever you're confronting and I've confronted
some pretty horrendously difficult experiences but
whatever you're confronting you know that it's not
coming from outside you it's coming from innocence
from inside you or from in it's coming from the
universe but purely through your own consciousness
so no outside complications I did not try to
stay in contact with the outside world at all
let's hear from Kari go ahead Kari thank you
so much for all your work I've heard you speak
years ago through PCC and CIS and I've enjoyed
your writings and and many bits but I love this
presentation that you did today so coherent and
walking through each of the stages and sessions
and the way you organized the arc of the journey
is really impressive and super-rich so thank you
so much for that thank you three questions you can
pick one if you want if it seems too but the the
astrological integration I'm really curious about
you know your individual chart your transits how
the individual chart kind of functioned as a
lens for you to entering these you know either
subconscious parts of yourself to be able to see
them or the you know the collective unconscious as
well all of the parts mmm there and and you know
how much of the of the chart do you think remained
as you entered these less individuated states yeah
one the individual part two the transits any you
know just any little head bits that stick out I
guess and then the third one I'm really curious
particularly it came up for me when you were
talking about being in the ocean of suffering
and the the healing that can come about from
processing that internally and individually and
I'm curious if you if those effects you felt them
in your I'm just gonna call it your waking life
your your normal states of consciousness in if
it kind of came back from people around you or in
world events or you know any potent moments where
that where that you really felt that reflection of
your internal experience from the external world
yeah let's start on your last question and then
work forward into the earlier ones yeah it did
manifest there were manifestations that emerged
in the outer world and so let me mention my book
the living classroom and there's a chapter on
teaching and dark matter lead on what my I never
talked to my students about my work right I just
made a firewall between my professional life and
my inner harmonic work and yet I found over time
that various students were being activated by my
inner work though that the deeper I went the more
powerful the activation became and it became such
a prominent part of my teaching that I found that
I had to I had to understand what was going on
I had to learn how to work with these forces so
for me integration doesn't mean simply personal
integration into my personal life but it also
means helping take care of all the derivative
social fallout of one's own experiences I found
for example that while I was teaching and I would
just be reaching to give examples of something
I was trying to explain that the examples that I
would reach for would without my even being aware
of it students were coming up after class and they
say you know that's interesting that you use that
example because that's exactly what happened to
me this week and this happened over and over again
that there was some kind of boundary which had
come down between my mind and my students mind
it was and not only not only were these things
kind of like triggering sort of an aha moment
from my students isn't that curious you know but
the deeper I went the more these synchronistic
touches began to trigger very very deep healing
experiences in the students It was as if their
souls were in communication with my soul and they
were giving me bits and pieces of insights into
where they were what they needed where they were
suffering where they were hurting and this was
happening without me being consciously aware of
the process at all and so I really had to study
this I really had to understand what was what was
driving these processes and eventually I wrote
after dark night early dawn I wrote an entire book
on the living classroom on the collective dynamics
in the classroom and I don't mention psychedelics
there because this is not a psychedelic phenomena
this is simply about the nature of consciousness
at one level we have private mind but just beneath
our private mind mine does not have privacy
there are collective dimensions of mind it's
like throwing a rock into a lake the ripples
spread out when you do deep deep work the ripples
of that work spread out and touch the lives of
people around you the place where I experienced
this most profoundly was in my classroom because
I was working in a collective context I could see
these ripples coming back at me all the time the
first the issue of astrology and individual and
global transits this is a complicated question
and I'm not an astrologer so I want to be very
careful about this I tracked my sessions I used
astrology to plan my sessions after I learned from
Rick tarnis about the correlations between outer
planets and inner experience in psychedelic days
so I I plant my sessions by transits and I also
tracked the patterns of my breakthroughs projected
against the pattern of the planets and I found it
to be a very complicated correlation while there
were correlations between my individual transits
and global transits with the unfolding of my
psychedelic experience there were also differences
that I wasn't expecting there was a kind of a
failure to find correspondence for example my
breakthroughs were not always paired with with
Uranus all right my my really really intense up
against the wall death in your face experiences
were not a confident we're not marked by Saturn
transits or Saturn global transits or even Pluto
transits and so it was a complicated process when
when my work began to go off the edge of time and
space when I began to enter deeper and deeper into
archetypal reality and then beyond archetype of
reality into dharmakaya or the diamond luminosity
I found what I felt was a kind of a roll-off of
astrological variables that the astrology did not
seem my my psychedelic dance did not seem to map
very easily into the astrological dance and I
began to think that there actually might be a
roll off effect of one's solar dance and one's
session experiences and this continues to be an
area of active dialogue for me it's an active
consideration there is an appendix in the book
the last appendix is called pushing the limits of
astrological correspondence and in that chapter
in that appendix I give the dates of all of my
sessions so if one wanted to one can look at
my natal chart one could look at the sessions
when you look at the correlations or lack of
correlations and so forth now I know that that's
not a this not enough sessions given in the book
to really get a definitive answer but I wanted
to support the discussion of the relationship
between astrology astrological transits and global
transits and one's own psychedelic work to me
that's an open question at this point I know that
there are correlations particularly in the early
stages of one works whether those correlations
continue to be as strong in the late stages of
one's work I'm not as convinced I'm okay in terms
of my own chart that gets too complicated you know
I have a lot of Neptune in my chart I have a lot
of water in my chart I have a Sun square Neptune
with Neptune in the first house so there are a
lot of them I have some other dynamics that I
was destined to do this type of work you know and
I want to mention the ocean of suffering this was
not something that was forced on me I didn't
understand at the time but this and I don't
think the universe forces any of us into this type
of work this was too too hard too demanding too
difficult for it to have it before so I mean what
I learned over time again is it this is something
that I voluntarily took on in this incarnation
it was part of the plan of my incarnation to do
this work and to do the ocean of suffering work
in particular so I'm the volunteer and I think
we're all when we get into this deep deep muck
that we get into we're volunteers for this work
awesome thank you so much Pauline amber in Poland
and we are so happy to finally see you live and
thank you wanted to say how much we appreciated
your call I have a few questions but let's start
and let's continue the theme of the ocean of
suffering and where we live in Poland of course
was the site of one of the most horrific events
that happened I would say for centuries which
by which I mean of course the Holocaust yeah
when you had your experience of the ocean of
suffering did you experience anything specific
or was the specific information or visions that
you had that might have related to something
like this the reason I'm asking this question
is because the event which happened 80 years ago
is so palpable that it's still in the atmosphere
it's still in the collective you can feel it
here in the land and you know it's it's there
in the collective for him whether we like it
or not and I was just interested in whether
in any admissions you actually had a sense
of what happens then yeah I did not go into
specifically identifiable historical traumas like
the Holocaust what happened was I basically was
taken into deeper and deeper and deeper into pain
and fury and chaos and extraordinary suffering
that kept getting larger and larger it wasn't
narrowly focused in any century or any country
or any place it expanded to include hundreds of
thousands millions of people and it expanded to
include hundreds of years thousands of years
until eventually my subjective experience was
that it included all the human beings and all the
conflicts that emerged in the history of humanity
I mean something of that scope so I have no doubt
that trauma like the Holocaust or trauma like the
extinction of Native Americans and other tribal
conflicts and so on I have no doubt that those
were implicitly present in what I was working
with but it it wasn't explicitly present it was
like to me you know stan has this concept of
a coexistence system of condensed experience
I think the collective psyche also has these
massive aggregate these balls of collective
experience I call them the the meta matrices
they are they are the the meta coexistence the
correct systems of the collective psyche that fuse
multiple historical periods and multiple cultures
and multiple people's experience late in this
whole series it became very clear to me was that
what I was engaging was memory a living memory of
trauma that was embedded in the collective psyche
I should mention that where I live in Youngstown
Youngstown Ohio we haven't had a Holocaust here
but we have a long history of violence it goes
back to the Native Americans and there were
some massacres that took place here there is a
tremendous influx of Eastern European this is
a town that made steel there's there's a lot of
old-world patriarchy a lot of violence against
women a lot of old institutional violence and the
Mafia took over our town for decades they were
gangland shootings in neighborhood parking lots
my sense is that because the ocean of suffering
was on the agenda in my work that I was actually
brought to a place where these poisons run close
to the surface in the collective psyche and
I'm sure that if I were working in Poland or
in a place that it would have been more explicit
the historical trauma that you're referring to
thank you thank you first of all Chris thanks so
much for all your work over the the decades been
a huge fan forever and ever and ever and I'm just
so wonderful and on this ocean of suffering issue
that's been brought up and touched on because
that's kind of like the next stop on the journey
for a lot of the people out there working your
book dark night early dawn was extremely helpful
to patron i we we don't work with LSD we work
with holotropic breathwork which is just another
technique in order to connect with these things
and what we had noticed over the years was that
there were individuals who under not predictable
circumstances began to contact what seemed to
be this ocean of suffering it wasn't a past life
which happens often enough but there was thinking
about it and then we realized my goodness people
need some clarity that this is not just a personal
stuff that they're saddled with and have to carry
around forever they are in a sense volunteers yes
and so this was extremely useful and some people
in spiritual emergency that come to us begins
realized oh so I was trying to solve the basic
problem between men and women for the last five
thousand years okay well you know I've got other
things I've got to do today and so that I want to
thank you very much for that and it's clear now
how this network will make more available to many
more people whatever techniques to work at even
with spontaneous experiences and what we developed
was using systemic constellation work then to do a
constellation for the individual that is caught in
this that would say okay here's the representative
for the part of the man woman's story that's mine
and here's a representative for the part of the
man woman's story that hmm you know that's a great
big thing and then to let this this clarity Wow
I do have work to do we all have work to do and
there's something else going on yeah and and so
I just want to thank you for the earlier work I'm
so glad to see this thank all the powers that
living breathing so I'm looking forward to the
stage and our workshops in which the the comments
about the other other stages of the past becomes
thank you I I completely agree and I think as
we go deeper into this historical crisis that
we've entered I think we're entering into a
collective dark night of the soul it seems
like there's a profound detoxification taking
place that the poisons of history are coming out
of our collective pores maybe we see it if we
look around us in body politic but it's coming
out of our pores and it's coming up underneath
us and flooding so that if we're interested in
doing purifying work if we're interested in
doing transformational work when we open we
open it if we have a technique that's powerful
enough like holotropic breathwork we open at
an individual level and then we open at these
deeper levels now I'm not a therapist but if
I were a therapist and if I were working with
people entering these states I think just what
you're describing differentiating different
levels of the work that emerges recognizing
kind of what is mine personally and what is
not mine personally but mine collectively
it's important to have closure and to be able to
close these collective levels and there would be
I would think an importance of kind of widening
those sessions down and kind of concretizing the
collective work in contrast and separate from
one's individual work now I will say that I
went into this work voluntarily I stayed into
it voluntarily and I am infinitely glad for
just personal reasons let alone the collective
reasons I am personally very glad to have done
this work because the rewards that came were
not simply a karmic paying back but when one
opens and embraces one's life as a member of the
species when one's open to the species and takes
responsibility for the pain and suffering of the
species it sets in motion not only a healing of
that species but there is a tremendous infusion
of light that enters into the collective psyche
and into your psyche as it enters into the
collective psyche and so I have been so deeply
rewarded more than amply compensated for the
work that I did in the ocean of suffering and
other levels and I think that this is true for
other people too that when we give deeply and
generously to those around us sooner or later
we don't know when how or where but sooner or
later there is a deep fruition that comes up
underneath us that carries us individually
where the universe is intent on carrying the
human species as a collective and that is into
this birth of this profoundly new quality of
consciousness that I'm calling the diamond
soul or the future human thank you so much Chris
as Kerry said that was such a beautifully laid
out coherent arc and I'm so April for the time
that you have spent with us today and for all
of you here connecting from all around the world
thank you so much for uniting today in both our
hearts and our minds and we send each of you so
much love and infinite blessings on your journey
as you deepen into your own explorations
and the healings that we're all here doing
right now today in this world thank you so
much be well and we will see you next time